Mitchell Library, Harpur MS A89, pp. 150-176.
The Tower of the Dream.
Part I.
How wonderful are Dreams! Yet, are they but
(As some suppose) the thin disjoining shades
Of facts and feelings long foregone or late,
As gathered recomposed, and disposed put in ghostly act
And strange procession, wildly mixed, and yet
So life-like, though thus composite and wild,
By wakeful Fancy,—in her mimic mood when alone awake,
And thence unhindered in her mimic craft,
Tracking She tracks the vaguer drifts of wearied Thought,
Itself sunk sleepward? Wonderful no less
Are they though this be true; and wondrous more
Is she who in the dark, and stripped of sense,
Can claim such sovereignty—the Queen of Art!
For what a cunning painter is she then,
And sculptor, who, in bodying from the waste
Of things memorial littering life's dim floor,
The forms and features manifold and quaint
That crowd the timeless vistas of a Dream,
Fails never in a stroke, and breathes as well
A spirit of motion into all her work—
The test of deity;—inspiring too
Her phantom creatures with more eloquent tones
Than ever broke in subtle waves, like light,
Upon a waking ear?
But are they more?
Sure glimpses oft, though vague, of some wide sea
Of mystic being, on whose lonely shore
Things mortal terminate; and where the pent
Impatient Soul, from its sleep-shrouded crib
Slipping sometimes, is wont to roam at large,
Like Crusoe, staring forth; or musing stand
As once the intelligence of Newton stood
Upon the shores of Time, while the great deep
Of Nature, yet untried, around it loomed
Under heaven's the incommunicable dome, sky
Illimitably out.
But vain is all
Conjecture: they are Dreams! and wonderful,
However we may rank them in our lore.
And worthy well a some passing thought are things states
Of our interior being, though aberrant,
That with a wand so capable can bring
Back to the faded heart, the rosy flush
And sweetness of a long fled love, or touch
The eyes of an old enmity with tears
Of a yet older friendship; or restore
A world-lost mate, or reunite in joy
The living and the dead! Yet this can Dreams:
And more as wonderful;—can, when so wills
Their wand's weird wielder, whatsoe'er it be,
Lift up the fallën—fall'n however low!
Rejuvenate the worn; enrich the poor;
The past imparadise, and enchant the present;
Build in the future higher than the hope
Of Power, when boldest, ever dared to soar;
Annul, as with the sanction of the Infinite,
The prison bars of place, the dens of time,—
Giving the rigid and dull-clanking chain
Which Force, that grey iniquity, hath clenched
About its captive, to relent,—yea, stretch
Out into Fairy-land; or melt like wax
In that fierce life which whose spirit lightens wide around
Round Freedom, seated on his mountain throne!
Or witching Memory, where she darkling lies,
Can so accomplish her, that she can make
All brute bulk ocular,—the great earth itself and or spread her wings
Diaphanous, like a mighty globe of glass
O'er a whole life time Hung in the void of time—as from east to west
Over all ages
Evolve at once the wings of morn, and show
All things beneath them in one world-wide act,
Instant and universal!—Wonderful!
But not thus always are our dreams benign:
Oft are they miscreations—gloomier worlds
Crowded tempestuously with Wrongs and Fears
More ghastly than the Actual ever knew;
And rent with racking noises, such as might
If audible ever to a soul awake,
Go thundering only through the wastes of Hell!
So wonderful are Dreams: and I have had known
Many most wild and strange. And once, long since,
As in the death-like mystery of Sleep
My body lay impalled, my soul arose
And journeyed outward in a dream of wonder.—
In the mid hour of a dark night, methought
I roamed the margin of a waveless Lake,
Which, in the knotted forehead of the land
Deep sunken, like a huge Cyclopic Cyclopean eye,
Lidless, and void of speculation, stared
Glassily up,—for ever sleepless,—up
At the wide vault of heaven; and that I had
Also a vague and mystic consciousness
That over against me, on the farther shore,
Which yet I might not see, there stood a Tower
Such as we read of in some old romance.
The darkness darkened, until overhead
Solidly black the starless heaven domed,
And earth was one wide blot—when, as I looked,
Suddenly lamping through the hollow dark
A Light swung blazing from the unseen Tower,
(Unseen, though prophesied in imagination)
And brought at once its rounded structure forth
Out of the mighty gloom, wherein, till then,
So shut it seemed as one in substance with it.
And when the Light had steadied, hanging there
Against the grim front of the night-backed Tower,
Suspended as by magic, I might see
In the wide Lake whose whole disc now between
Glimmered though dubiously, the falling stream
Of its wild radiance, columnar and vast,
Reach quivering,—down, like a great shaft of fire,
Through the lit waters.
Long in stedfast wonder
It held me gazing,—till I thence could feel
A strange and thrillingly attractive power
In gradual operation; and ere long,
My bodily weight seemed witched away, and up
I mounted, poised within the passive air;
Then glode ascendingly sheer o'er the Lake,
Which, far below, as tow'rds the wondrous light
The attraction drew me, I beheld illumed
Even to its sullen depths with shifting beams,
That tangled Tower-ward into one broad path
Of multifarious splendor,—one red blaze,
Yet various, wildly interwrithing quick,
As every molecule of the watery mass
Had an organic life, and played a part
Restlessly proper to its wayward self,
Though tending all into one glow of bright
Disunion in bright union.
On I slid:
Nor knew I why—but my amaze wore off
As thus I glode over the Lake, and still
Approached the Tower and that so wondrous light!
And soon, instead, a many-branching warmth,
Even like the spirit of new love, began
To tingle in my being: and with this
So sweet conception,—lo, a beauteous change!
Within a circular balcony, whose roof
Was fluted silver, lightly propt on four
Pencil-like shafts of jet, whose the polished lines [rules]
Of which Descending to an ivory balustrade rail,
Glistened in contrast with a covert gleam;
And which, high up the Tower, emporched a huge
And brazen dore,—behold, a Lady, all
Of light immaculate—yea, face and form
All of a Hesper radieancy composed,
And lovelier than lustrous, stood alone,
Yet, as it seemed, expectant; for as still
She witched me tow'ards her there, she kept beckoned me
With tiny hand more splendid than a star:
Beckoned and smiled Beckoning and smiling,—not as mere mortals use,
With risible throes, local and weak at most,—
But with her whole bright influence all at once
In gracious act; as smiles the Morning, when
Its subtle lips in rosy glory part
And redden lengthwise redden, under and above
The pearly clouds;—and with a voice intense
And intimately tender as the first
Fine feeling of a love-born bliss, and oh!
More silvery in its sweetness to the ear's
Internal test, than seemeth to the eye
The wild white radiance of the maiden Moon,
When from some promontory looking forth cape's dark beak her rising mass
Over O'erlooks the ocean,—even with such a voice,
So keen, so silvery, she kept asking aye
"Where hast thou stayed so long?"
I heard—but felt
Pass from me forth a cry of instant fear,
As swooning through intensity of joy,
Methought I drifted—whither? All was now
One wide cold blank—the Lady and the Tower,
The gleaming Lake, and with all around it—one
Wide dreary blank, the drearier for that still
A dizzy, clinging, ghostly consciousness
Kept glimmering from mine inmost pulse of life,
Like a far meteor in some dismal marsh:
How long I dreamt not—but the thrilling warmth
Which, like the new birth of a passionate bliss,
Erewhile had searched me to the quick, again
Shuddered within me,—more and more, until
Mine eyes had opened under two that made
All else like darkness; and upon my cheek
A breath that seemed the final spirit of health
And Floral sweetness, harbingered more near
The fond enquiry of that silver voice
Which once to have heard was never to forget:
"Where hast thou stayed so long?"
And when she thus
Had spoken, there came warbled, as it seemed
In sweet[?] mystical respondence to her voice,
Still music, such as Eolus gives forth,
But purer, deeper;—warbled as from some
Unsearchable recess of soul supreme—
Some depth of the Eternal! echoing thence
Through the sweet meaning of its spirit-speech,
The fond enquiry that awoke me now:
"Where hast thou stayed so long?"
I answered not,
But followed in mute love her eyes with mine,
As in that balcony which up the Tower
Emporched the brazen door, methought I now
Close at her side reclined upon a couch
Of purple, blazoned all with stars of gold
Tremblingly rayed with spiculated gems,
And argent moons,—and bearing cushions, rough
With sheaves of flowers in glowing tissue wrought.
Thus sat we, looking forth: nor did I marvel
As hers now led my vision, to remark
That the broad Lake, with its green shelving shores
Swarming with flowers, and or draped with vines, and thence
The prospect all—hills, skies, and winding vales,
And bloomy forests of unspeakable beauty,
Were basking in the radiance blessedness of a day
More blessedly So goldenly serene, than ever that never yet
The perfect power of life-essential light
Might so enrobe the common world of man
Since Paradise was lost.
I saw all this
Surpassing beauty—but I saw it thus
Through her superior life, her moon-like sphere
Of being, that seemed the inexhaustible source
(Transpicuously evinced) of breathing thoughts—
Breathing abroad like fragrance odors from a flower;
And effluent idealities; and more
Of rosy passion and affectionate joy,
And earnest tenderness, than many souls
Of Earth's most fervent and ecstatic daughters
United might possess;—all interflowing
Through the fine issues of a love at once
Wilful and nice,—but sanctioned none the less
By its so brilliant pureity. Nor might
The glassy Lake below receive the print more quickly give
Nimble impressions of the coming wind's
Invisible footsteps, dimpling swift along,
Than instant tokens of communion sweet
With outward beauty's subtle spirit, passed
Forth from her eyes, and thence in lambent waves
Suffused and lightened o'er the splendid whole
Of her bright visage, or about her head
In spheres ran raying like a glory of bliss!
But as upon the wonder of her beauty
My soul now feasted, even till it seemed
Instinct with kindred lustre,—lo, her eyes
Suddenly saddened, and abstractedly
Outfixing them as on some far wild thought
That darkened up over our peace like a portentous cloud
Over the morning of our peace, she flung
Her silver voice into a mystic song
Of many measures, gathering as they went,
And sliding on—a sweet abundant flood
Of metric melody! With which, as still
She poured it forth, invisible Singers mixed
A choral burthen that prolonged the strain's
Rich concords, till the echoes of the hills
Came forth in turn, and, flowing off, afar,
Blent all into one mystery of sound—
One manifold cadence—dying down. The Song
(Which strangely seemed through all its mystic drift
Addressed to the so stubborn fact, that I
Was sleeping, and its utterer but a Dream!)
Is traced upon the tablet of my soul
In shining lines that intonate themselves—
Not sounding to the ear, but to the thought
Out of the vague vast of the Wonderful!
And might, when hardened into normal speech, And narrowed from its wide and various sweep
Into such flows as make our waking rhymes
Most wildly musical, be written thus:
The Song.
Wide apart—wide apart
In old Time's dim heart,
One terrible Fiend doth his grim watch keep
Over the mystery
Lovely and deep,
Locked up in thy history
Beautiful Sleep!
Could we disarm him—
Could we but charm him,
The soul of the sleeper might happily leap
Through the darkness so dreadful—so deathly and deep,
That shroudeth the triple divinity
Composing thy mystical Trinity:
Liberty, gratitude,
Boundless beatitude:
Beautiful Spirit of Sleep!
Beautiful Spirit of Sleep!
Could we confound him
Who darkens thy throne,
Could we surround him
With spells like thy own;
For the divinity
Then of thy Trinity
Oh, what a blesseder reign were begun!
For then were it evermore human, and evermore one
With all that soul, freed from the body's strait scheme,
Inherits of surlight and mystical dream.
And to sleep were to die
Into life in the Infinite,
Holy and high,
Spotless and bright,
And so peacefully deep:
And thence unto liberty, thence unto gratitude,
With the third in thy Trinity—boundless beatitude:
Beautiful Spirit of Sleep!
Part II.
She ceased: and a deep tingled silence fell
Into[?] Instantly round;—silence complete, and yet
Instinct as with a breathing sweetness, left
By the rare spirit of her voice, now hushed:
Even as the fragrance of an exquisite flower a flower were felt
Is felt in Pervaiding the mute air, through which, erewhile,
It hath had been carried borne by the loving delighted hand
Of some sweet-thoughted Maiden. Turning then
Her bright face tow'rds me, as I stood entranced,
Yet with keen wonder stung, she said:
"I love thee,
As first love loveth—utterly! But ah,
This Love itself—this purpled-wingëd Love—
This spirit-sweetening Spirit of delight,
Is but a honey-bee of Paradise,
That only in its morning glory dares
To range abroad—and when a vagrant most,
Adventure out into the common world
Of Man and Woman! thither lured by sight
Of some sweet human soul that blooms apart
Untainted by a rank soil's weedy growths;—
Lured thither thus—yet being, even then,
But wandering wildly, wilfully away
From its pure birth-place, whither it must return,
Or forfiet its celestial passport, ere
The dread night cometh." Yet of how great worth
Is all foregone affection? In the spring
Of even the lowliest love, how many sweet
And beautiful things that would not else have been,
Grow up like flowers, and breathe a perfume forth
That never leaves the since it once hath hit,
However visionary seems at last
The charm through which it came." And having said
These mystical sentenses, so sweet and wild wild and sweet,
And memorably mournful,—lo, her eyes
Ran o'er with lustres as they opened up
Under mine own now melancholy gaze.
And so we stood, turned one unto the other,
Till love again grew glad, even from the rich
And wine-like luxury of its own free tears.
Forth then once more we looked—silently happy.
Alas! not long: for with a short low gasp
Of sudden fear, she started; nor might eye I
Stand unalarmed. For hark! within the Tower
A sound of strenuous steps approaching fast
Rang upward, as it seemed, from the hard slabs
Of a steep winding stair; and soon the huge
And brazen portals that behind us shut
Burst open! with a clang of loosened bolts—
A clang, like thunder, that went rattling out
Against the echoes of the distant hills.
With deafened ears and looks aghast, I turned
Tow'rds the harsh noise,—there to behold, between
The brazen jaunts in the tower-wall from which
The door swung inward, a tremendous Form!
A horrid gloomy Form!, that shapeless seemed,
And yet in its so monstrous bulk, to Man
A hideous likeness bore bare! Still more and more
Deformed it grew as forth it swelled, and then
Its outlines, shadowing outward, so were lost
In a one dim undistinguishable haze,
That Which hung around them, even as dull grey clouds
Beskirt a coming Tempest Storm pitch[?], dark itself,
And murkiest in the midst—yea, murkiest there,
Where, big with fate, and hid in solid cloud,
The yet still spirit of the thunder broods,
And menaces the world.
The Lady of Light
Had rushed to my extended arms and hid
Her beamy face, fright-harrowed, in my bosom!
And thus we stood, made one in fear; while still
That terrible Vision out in upon us glared
With horny eyes—the horrider for that
No touch of passion vitalised their fixed
Eumenidean stone-cold stare, as tow'rds
Some surely destined task they seemed to guide
Its pitiless strength along.
With one dark stride
Then glooming forward, and extending straight
One shadowy arm, from my reluctant grasp
It tore the Radiant Lady, muttering: This
Is love forbidden! in a voice whose tones
Were like low thunders ominously heard
Outroaming from the clouded gorges wild
Of neighboring mountains, when a summer sultry storm
Is brooding in its dark pavilions there,
And concentrating, like a mighty host,
Ere it rush burst vale-ward; and, as suddenly,
Siezed by the other, I was backward thrown
Within the Tower, and heard ere I could rise
From the cold platform, the huge brazen door
Drawn hoarsly grating to; its beam-like bar
Dropt, with a wall-quake, and its the bolts all shot
Into their sockets with a thundrous shattering jar!
I may not paint the horrible despair
That frosze me now: (more horrible than aught
In actual destiny, whether bonds or death,
Could give the self-possession of my soul,
If wide awake.) I listened. All was still!
Within—without—all silent, stirless, cold.
What was my doom? And where was she, my late
So luminous delight? Gone! Reft away
So strangely—terribly! and I myself,
For some all unimaginable cause,
A dungeoned wretch! Time, every drip of which
Was as an age, kept trickling on, but there
Brought no release—no hope—not even a breath
That spake of fellowship, or even of life,
Out of myself—my lonely self! I stood
In marble-cold astonishment of heart,
Utterly blank. And when at length I cast
A desperate look—so desperate, that the power
Of vision stung me like a deadly curse—
Up and around, pure pity of myself
So warmed and loosened from my brain the pent
And icy anguish, that its load at once
Came, like an alp-thaw, streaming through mine eyes;
Till resignation, that so balmy sweet
Meek flower of grief that which hath its root in tears
Grew out of mine, and therewith, strength of will
To inspect my Prison.
'Twas a lofty Cell,
Half round, and had within the granite wall
That cut the circle of its floor in twain,
A second door—shut, and all clamped with brass
And rough with rows of monstrous iron studs,
And which migh[t] haply have thence opened in
Athward some stairway (as I guessed) that led
Down through the Tower; and by the side of this
A wingëd Steed upon four dragon claws—
A strange, mute, mystic, almost terrible Thing,
Stood rigid, with a tripod near it placed.
Bare were the dull and rugged walls, but pierced
High out of reach by two small ports that looked
Eastward and westward.—As I noted these
Full on my sight a transcient sunbeam fell
Slantingly through, and glowed on the damp floor,
A moment, like a streak of burning blood,
Then vanished; wherefore in my heart I guessed
That o'er the mountain tops the sun was then
Ocean-ward sinking.
By degrees the night
Came on, and the Cell darkened: yea, I saw
The Sted Steed and tripod—all its furniture,
Fade, melting gradually, more and more,
Into the darkness; even as a fish
Through the dense medium of its element
Retiring down, is in its outlines seen
More shadowy—till 'tis lost. Then all was black.
And two to and fro I paced, hour after hour,
And heard my step, the only sound to me
In th' whole wide world, reverb with a dull blow
Down through the hollow Tower that seemed to yawn
Immeasurably beneath me,—as it were
A monstrous well, whose wide waste mouth was
bridged
By that near-[?] hollow dull--quaking strip of floor alone
On which I darkling strode;—yet on I kept
Pacing, though horrified. Hour after hour
Passed, as if clotting at the heart of Time—
Each an eternity of expectation,
And weary [unclear] astonishment—hour after hour!
And yet no other sound was living there,
Though, as I knew, one live unmoving Thing
So near me stood in that blind solitude—
Stood waiting—wherefore? by the inner door.
At last, all suddenly, in the air aloft,
O'er the Tower-roof, a wild, weird, wailful song
Woke flyeing, many-voiced,—then sweeping off,
Out tow'rds the echoey hills, so passed away
In dying murmurs through the hollow dark.
Song.
In vain were our spells wrought,
In vain was she well taught
How that dread w Watcher's eyes drowsy to keep;
In vain was the dragon-steed
There at the hour of need
Out with his double freight Blissward to leap.
Lost—lost—lost—lost!
In vain were our spells all of infinite cost!
Lost—lost—lost—lost!
Yon Gulf by a mortal may never be crost!
Never—ah, never!
The doom holds for ever!
And to aid hHer aught more
Is out of ous sphere, and transcendeth our lore.
Lost—lost—lost—lost!
Come away—come away.
Since only in soul yon vague Gulph Gulf may be crost,
Our Mistress so gentle her failure must weep!
Come away—come away—
See how uprolls the day!
Away to the mystic mid-regions of Sleep.
Lost—lost—lost—lost—
So passed that song: (of which the drift alone
Is here reached after in such leaden speech
As uncharmed mortals use:) and when its tones
Out tow'rds the mountains in the dark afar
Had wasted, I grew sensible, methought,
Of seasonable change;—that now the Cell
Kept clarifying, till the darkness seemed
Marbled with grey; and then the Steed again,
And tripod, figured indistinctly through
The Tthinning gloom, and gradually thence
Came forth in full developement, by the same
Degrees reversed in which they'd faded there
Into the darkness as the night came on.
It was the Dawn: and thus it clearing kept,
Till through the eastern port a golden [unclear] rod
Of light fell transciently, and so bespake
The sunrise. Oh! it was a dessolate pass,
To feel,—immured in that so deadly place relentless d[unclear] Tower keep,—
That then the sun was How on the purple hills the sun was then
Rejoicing in his glory. Then to know
That he was wheeling up the heaven, and o'er
My Prison roof:—hour after hour, to think
That he was tracking with a step of fire
His midway circle, and thence glorying down
Into the west. But this was my dread fate
While seven times day and night so came; and yet
I slept not! nor (to my amazement) there,
Through all this weary woe, [unclear] drear time, did the wintry pinch tooth
Of hunger shrink knaw within my corporal life! , no sense
Of No thirst inflamed me! While ever by the that grim door
That seemed to shut athwart the stairway, stood
That Which strange, unmoving, dragon-footed steed,
As from the first, and there the tripod, placed
As 'twere to aid some fugitive to mount
At once,—and fly! Mere wonder at my doom,
So unimaginably wild and vague,
Relieved despair.
But on the seventh night—hark!
What might I hear?—a step?—a light small step
Ascending by the stair! Swiftly it That by the stair ascending, swiftly came
Straight to the inner door—then stopt. Alas!
The black valve opened not; and yet, the while,
In evidence of some bright Presence, there Influence
Standing without, a rainbow radiance through
Its solid breadth, in [unclear] subtle wave on [unclear]t wave
Came flushing, even as a sunset glow
Through some dense cloud upon the verge of heaven
In swift rich curves wells percolating forth—
Comes percolating So came it,—filling all the Cell at length
With rosy lights that in the darkness fumed
Like luminous odors; at the scent of which
The mystic Steed, so rigid until now,
Moved, and spread wide his glimmering wings. When, hark!
Another step? Yea, the same strenuous tramp
That once before I'd heard big-beating up,
Came following—till a low sad cry without
Went to my heart, and I might hear ensue
A struggle as of one forced down the stair
By that so ruthless Guard!—down, till the Cell
Again had darkened, and the Tower itself
Stood once more as in some mute void of Time,
Or depth of distance infinitely out,
Achingly still. But not for long! again
The Monster's hateful tread came booming up,
Quake [unclear] above quake that with a shudder stopt
Dead at the door! It opened; and he stood
Full in its the dubious space:—but ere the Fiend
Might enter farther, rage and hate at once
Possessed me, and I charged him! For awhile
His horrible glooms voluminously vague,
Yet with a smothering pressure in their folds,
Involved me,—concentrating more and more,
And lapping closer in yet denser coils,
Each moment!—but my loathing now had grown
Into so vast a horror, that, methought,
I burst with irresistible strength away!
Rushed through the door, and down the stairway,—down
An endless depth; till a portcullis, hinged
In the Tower's basement, opened to my flight!
No sooner had I passed it than it fell
In thunder to! and thence my passage lay
Along the difficult ledges of a rock
Bordering the Lake.—
And when at last I paused
In that so giddy flight, methought I saw
The lustrous Lady up through the lit air
Ascending, with a steadfast downward look
Of parting recognition,—full of love,
But painless, passionless. Upward she passed,
Above the Tower, and o'er the clouds,—and when
Her radiance melted through heaven's marble dome,
And left it vacant in its world-like infinite vastness,
There fell back on my soul as sense of loss
So bleak, and so desolate, that with a wild
Sleep-startling outcry, suddenly I awoke!
Awoke to find it but a Dream of Wonder:
Yet ever since to feel as if some pure
And guardian Soul, out of the day and night,
Had passed for ever from the reach of Love.
Albeit I know, that to the Poet's mind
No light, no loveliness it once hath know,
Though only through the mystery of a dream,
Is after lost; but in effect remains
In union with its substance evermore—
A gathered portion of the life and might
Of its predestined influence on the world.
In this version, Part I = Parts I and II, and Part II = Parts III and IV of the later versions. On p. 150, Harpur further revised lines 7-9 at the top of the page as:
By mimic Fancy, when alone awake
And thence unhindered in her mystic craft,
She tracks &amp;c
On p. 153 it is unclear what Harpur's final intention was in the first 3 lines; these lines are resolved quite differently in the next chronological version (Australian Journal).
On p. 164 the text 5 lines up has been reconstructed from two marginal additions. The first, on p. 164, continues from the left margin to the right; the second is unsignalled on p. 165. The revised reading requires deletion of "And with these, her eyes" following the asterisk in the text, deletion of "And then, her eyes" in the first addition and "Ran oer with lustres &amp;c" in the second.
